<b>Juma Mosque: The Timeless Masterpiece of Khivan Architecture and the Philosophy of Ancient Pillars</b>

<b>The Juma Mosque</b> (Friday Mosque) stands at the geographic and structural heart of the world-renowned Itchan Kala historic fortress in Khiva, serving as one of the most ancient, culturally unique, and monumental sacred compounds in Central Asia. The architectural layout of this historical sanctuary departs fundamentally from the conventional design principles seen in other grand Islamic structures across the region. It features no massive turquoise domes, towering front portals (pishtaqs), or sprawling open-air inner courtyards. Instead, the mosque achieved global renown through its immense flat roof supported by hundreds of uniquely carved antique wooden pillars. Today, this exceptional asset occupies a primary position within the UNESCO World Heritage list, representing the most singular manifestation of the Khwarazmian building tradition.

<b>The foundation history of the mosque and the patronage of Abdurahmon Elchi</b> illustrate the complex multi-century evolution of the sanctuary. Historical geographic accounts, most notably the writings of the 10th-century Arab explorer Al-Maqdisi, confirm that a central Friday mosque existed on this precise site during the early medieval era. Over time, the original early structure degraded into near-total ruin. In the late 18th century, specifically between 1788 and 1789, a prominent and wealthy statesman of the Khanate of Khiva, <b>Abdurahmon Elchi</b>, financed a total structural reconstruction of the complex. Abdurahmon Elchi strategically utilized the surviving subterranean foundations and integrated the preserved antique carved pillars from the older structure, ensuring a deep sense of historical continuity.

<b>The spatial composition and the unique internal microclimate</b> evoke an atmosphere of quiet mystery for arriving visitors. The building is designed on a comprehensive rectangular blueprint, with overall dimensions spanning 55 by 46 meters. The exterior walls are intentionally unadorned, composed of simple, flat structural brickwork completely devoid of glazed tiles or mosaics, effectively cloaking the interior opulence from outer sight. The interior space unfolds as a single, vast hypostyle hall where the expansive flat ceiling is held aloft by a structural grid of 213 wooden pillars. Two small rectangular apertures are left open in the central roof ceiling, allowing natural sunlight and fresh desert air to pour into the hall, generating a dynamic interplay of light and shadow alongside natural temperature regulation.

<b>The repository of carved wooden pillars and traditional Uzbek applied arts</b> constitute the absolute crown jewel of the entire monument. Each of the 213 pillars possesses its own distinct mathematical dimensions, geometric silhouette, and complex, non-repeating floral (islimi) or geometric relief carvings. Scientific textological and structural analyses have revealed that a handful of these pillars date back to the 11th and 12th centuries, originally brought from Kath, the ancient capital of Khwarazm, or salvaged from other lost royal structures. Other pillars represent distinct carving styles from the 14th, 15th, and 18th centuries. Elite woodcarvers deeply incised intricate motifs of pomegranate leaves, grapevines, and complex arabesques into durable elm and poplar trunks, turning the hall into a living encyclopedia of regional craftsmanship.

<b>The sacred mihrab, advanced acoustic engineering, and the Juma Minaret</b> reinforce the functional spiritual perfection of the sanctuary. Embedded in the southern interior wall is the <b>mihrab</b>, precisely oriented toward Mecca, its niche framed with smooth, polished ganch plaster and complex floral reliefs. Gilded inscriptions on marble plaques mounted above the niche display Quranic verses alongside the exact historical dates of the late 18th-century reconstruction. The internal acoustic dynamics of the hypostyle layout were engineered with such precision that the prayers and sermons delivered by the Imam at the mihrab reflected perfectly across the grid, reaching worshippers standing at the furthest pillars. The northeastern exterior flank is anchored by the elegant, unadorned Juma Minaret, balancing the low horizontal visual profile of the mosque.

<b>The cultural significance, tourist potential, and long-term conservation of the heritage site</b> ensure that the Juma Mosque remains a focal point of global academic attention today. The structure serves as an enduring testament to ancient eco-friendly engineering and climatic adaptation. To prevent the organic wooden pillars from absorbing groundwater moisture and rotting, master builders positioned specialized waterproof stone bases, charcoal layers, and damp-absorbing pads beneath each structural footing. Today, no international traveler or architectural scholar visits Itchan Kala without exploring this silent forest of columns. In conclusion, the Juma Mosque remains a monumental manifestation of the profound artistic genius of the Uzbek people, an unyielding summit of regional woodcarving art, and a sacred, living chapter of our deep civilizational history.